Feat: LIP-32 — Sanity Checks for stVaults (#96)
lidofinance/lido-improvement-proposals: LIPS/lip-32.md

---
lip: 32
title: Sanity Checks for stVaults
status: WIP
author: Alexandr Drygin, Greg Shestakov, Victor Petrenko
discussions-to: tbd
created: 2025-09-01
updated: 2025-09-12
---

# LIP-32: Sanity Checks for stVaults

## Simple Summary

This proposal defines sanity checks for stVaults oracle reporting in Lido V3, establishing safeguards against malicious oracle behavior through on-chain validation of vault parameters and introducing a quarantine mechanism for indirect funding to prevent potential attacks.

## Abstract

> Lido V3 introduces stVaults, a new staking primitive that allows independent operators to manage validators with their own withdrawal credentials while minting stETH backed by their stake. This LIP proposes a comprehensive set of sanity checks for the stVaults oracle system to prevent malicious behavior and ensure the integrity of vault parameters.

Reviewer: nitpick: consider rephrasing to avoid the ambiguous reading that an operator fully owns the withdrawal credentials, since it’s a specific contract that can restrict some operations until obligations are settled.

```suggestion
Lido V3 introduces stVaults, a new staking primitive that allows independent operators to manage validators via vault-specific withdrawal credentials contracts while minting stETH backed by their stake. This LIP proposes a comprehensive set of sanity checks for the stVaults oracle system to prevent malicious behavior and ensure the integrity of vault parameters.
```

> The proposal introduces two funding flow types: direct funding through the `fund()` method, and indirect funding which requires a 3-day quarantine period (with an exception for increases less than 3.5% of vault total value). These mechanisms, combined with parameter validation for `totalValue`, `cumulativeLidoFees`, `liabilityShares`, and `slashingReserve`, create a robust defense against potential oracle manipulation.

Reviewer: The latest code version also includes `maxLiabilityShares`, which is currently missing in LIP.

---
lip: 32
title: Sanity Checks for stVaults
status: WIP
author: Alexandr Drygin, Greg Shestakov, Victor Petrenko
discussions-to: tbd
created: 2025-09-01
updated: 2025-09-12
---

# LIP-32: Sanity Checks for stVaults

## Simple Summary

This proposal defines sanity checks for stVaults oracle reporting in Lido V3, establishing safeguards against malicious oracle behavior through on-chain validation of vault parameters and introducing a quarantine mechanism for indirect funding to prevent potential attacks.

## Abstract

> Lido V3 introduces stVaults as part of a broader staking infrastructure platform, where independent operators manage validators with their own withdrawal credentials while minting stETH backed by their stake. As described in [LIP-31](./lip-31.md), the protocol implements a global accounting system through `VaultHub` - a central collateral registry that tracks each vault's total value and manages external shares minting/burning. This LIP proposes comprehensive sanity checks for the LazyOracle system that reports vault parameters to ensure the integrity of this global accounting framework.

Reviewer: Nitpick: I tried to find "LazyOracle" in LIP-31 and couldn't. The mechanism is mentioned a couple of times under the separate words "lazy oracle". Consider adding a direct link to the relevant section or using a unified term that can be found in the text.

**Attack vectors:**
- **Overstatement:** Enables minting of unbacked stETH by inflating the vault's locked value, violating the global backing invariant
- **Understatement:** May trigger inappropriate forced rebalance when the vault falsely appears to breach the Force Rebalance Threshold (FRT) 

#### 2. cumulativeLidoFees

**Definition:** Cumulative fees owed to Lido, denominated in ETH.

**Attack vectors:**
- **Overstatement:** Forces vault owners to pay excessive fees
- **Understatement:** Allows fee avoidance

#### 3. liabilityShares

**Definition:** External shares minted against the staking vault position, representing the vault's stETH liability that rebases with the token.

**Attack vectors:**
- **Overstatement:** Freezes excess funds by inflating the vault's recorded liability
- **Understatement:** Enables premature collateral withdrawal, potentially violating the reserve ratio (RR) requirements

#### 4. slashingReserve

**Definition:** Locked assets reserved for slashing penalties.

**Attack vectors:**
- **Overstatement:** Unnecessarily locks vault funds

> - **Understatement:** Allows penalty avoidance during slashing events

Reviewer: There are also attacks on disconnect from VaultHub. Allow when it should not be allowed and prohibit when it should be allowed.

Reviewer: Same true for `liabilityShares` manipulation

### Proposed Sanity Checks

Based on the identified attack vectors, we propose the following validation mechanisms: 

#### totalValue Upper Bound

> The upper bound for `totalValue` requires special consideration due to the critical attack vector it addresses. See the [detailed analysis](#totalvalue-upper-bound-critical-issue) below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upper bound for `totalValue` requires special consideration due to the critical attack vector it addresses. See the [detailed analysis](#totalvalue-upper-bound-critical-severity) below.
```

**Validation:** `totalValue >= 0`

**Analysis:** While understating `totalValue` could trigger force rebalance, the attack vectors are limited:
- Attackers seeking quick fund extraction would prefer secondary market-swaps over complex oracle manipulation
- Malicious force rebalance causes minimal damage as vault owners retain their stETH

**Decision:** No strict lower bound check beyond non-negativity to avoid impacting normal operations.

#### cumulativeLidoFees Upper Bound

**Validation Formula:** `maxFeeIncrease = (currentTimestamp - previousTimestamp) * 0.18 ETH`

**Rationale:** Since fees are derived only from rewards (not TVL), they cannot exceed total Ethereum issuance. The 0.18 ETH/second rate ensures the check remains valid even under extreme and quite unrealistic conditions:
- All vault ETH concentrated in a single vault
- Entire ETH supply staked through Lido
- Maximum commission rate (1950%) applied

#### cumulativeLidoFees Lower Bound

**Validation:** `newCumulativeFees >= previousCumulativeFees`

**Rationale:** As a cumulative counter, fees must be monotonically increasing.

#### liabilityShares Upper Bound

**Decision:** No check required.

> **Rationale:** Overstated `liabilityShares` only temporarily freezes excess funds, which self-corrects with the next accurate report.

Reviewer: After the latest changes, it seems that we now check reported `liabilityShares` against the onchain record of `maxLiabilityShares`

```solidity
// 5. _maxLiabilityShares is greater or equal than _liabilityShares and current `maxLiabilityShares`
if (_maxLiabilityShares < _liabilityShares || _maxLiabilityShares < record.maxLiabilityShares) {
    revert InvalidMaxLiabilityShares();
}
```

#### liabilityShares Lower Bound

**Implementation:** Already enforced in [VaultHub.sol](https://github.com/lidofinance/core/blob/c3401b863ca1eb591ca9de3017ffc209b3a50947/contracts/0.8.25/vaults/VaultHub.sol#L1028):

```solidity
uint256 liabilityShares_ = Math256.max(_record.liabilityShares, _reportLiabilityShares);

> ```

Reviewer: - Outdated because of introducing `maxLiabilityShares`
- Consider avoiding references to implementations that are not yet in production

#### slashingReserve Upper Bound

**Decision:** No check required.

**Rationale:** A malicious oracle can block withdrawals either by:
- Inflating `slashingReserve` (without check)
- Causing report reversion (with check)

Both scenarios prevent withdrawals equally, making the check ineffective.

#### slashingReserve Lower Bound

> **Implementation:** Already enforced in [VaultHub.sol](https://github.com/lidofinance/core/blob/cc307168ae939f4af001189af0e93a923b26a4b1/contracts/0.8.25/vaults/VaultHub.sol#L1006):

Reviewer: Consider avoiding references to implementations that are not yet in production (and the commits are different)

```solidity
uint256 minimalReserve = Math256.max(CONNECT_DEPOSIT, _reportSlashingReserve);
```

#### maxLiabilityShares Validation

**Definition:** Maximum liability shares minted during the current oracle period, used to calculate locked value.

**Validation:** `_maxLiabilityShares >= _liabilityShares && _maxLiabilityShares >= record.maxLiabilityShares`

**Implementation:** Already enforced in LazyOracle:

```solidity
if (_maxLiabilityShares < _liabilityShares || _maxLiabilityShares < record.maxLiabilityShares) {
    revert InvalidMaxLiabilityShares();
}

> ```

Reviewer: I don't think the “Already enforced in...” format is appropriate here, since LIP describes Sanity Checks in LazyOracle. This format was used to refer to existing checks in other places (specifically in VaultHub)

**Rationale:** Ensures monotonic increase of max liability shares to prevent manipulation of locked value calculations.

### totalValue Upper Bound: Critical severity

> The most severe attack vector involves inflating `totalValue` to mint unbacked stETH through external shares. The challenge is that validator balances cannot be verified on-chain without EIP-4788, making the oracle the sole source of truth for vault state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most severe attack vector involves inflating `totalValue` to mint unbacked stETH through external shares. The challenge is that validator balances cannot be verified on-chain without [EIP-4788](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4788), making the oracle the sole source of truth for vault state.
```

#### Attack Prerequisites
1. Corrupted Accounting Oracle that publishes malicious Merkle roots

> 2. Collusion with vault operators to submit false on-demand reports

Reviewer: Might not be necessary if/when minting stETH is permissionless

3. Available external shares minting capacity within global limits

#### Attack Sequence
1. Corrupted oracle submits inflated `totalValue` in Merkle root via extended Accounting Oracle
2. Colluding vault owners submit on-demand reports with Merkle proofs to VaultHub
3. VaultHub calculates inflated `locked` value: `locked = inflatedTV × (1 – RR)`
4. Vaults call `mintExternalShares()` to mint unbacked stETH based on false locked values
5. Attackers withdraw stETH through standard WithdrawalQueue processes

#### Impact

> In the worst case, attackers could steal up to 30% of the core protocol's ETH by exploiting the global external shares minting limits, violating the fundamental backing invariant: `stETH.totalSupply() ≤ Core Pool total supply + Σ Staking Vault locked`.

Reviewer: It is unclear where the 30% figure came from. It would be interesting to see the calculations

}
```

**Parameter Constraints:**
- `quarantinePeriod`: 0 to 30 days
- `maxRewardRatioBP`: 0 to 65,535 (0% to 655.35%)
- `maxLidoFeeRatePerSecond`: 0 to 10 ETH per second

These parameters can be updated by accounts with the `UPDATE_SANITY_PARAMS_ROLE` through:
```solidity
function updateSanityParams(
    uint256 _quarantinePeriod,
    uint256 _maxRewardRatioBP,
    uint256 _maxLidoFeeRatePerSecond
) external onlyRole(UPDATE_SANITY_PARAMS_ROLE)
```

### inOutDelta On-Chain Cache

The `inOutDelta` parameter tracks the net flow of funds in and out of a vault. To ensure trustless validation, this value is cached on-chain using the `RefSlotCache` library.

#### Data Structure

```solidity
struct Int104WithCache {
    int104 value;           // Current inOutDelta
    int104 valueOnRefSlot;  // inOutDelta at last reference slot
    uint48 refSlot;         // Reference slot number
}
```

#### Implementation

**VaultHub Contract:**
- Maintains two `Int104WithRefSlotCache` objects for the last two reference slots
- Updates cache via `withValueIncrease()` on fund movements
- Retrieves current values using `getCurrentValue()`

**LazyOracle Contract:**

> - Accesses historical values via `getCurrentValueOnRefSlot()`

Reviewer: There is no such method anymore
```suggestion
- Accesses historical values via `getValueForRefSlot()`
```

Direct funds via `fund()` bypass quarantine entirely due to on-chain verification.

#### Total Value Underflow Prevention

**Vulnerability:** Integer underflow during type casting can produce extremely large values:
```solidity
uint256(int256(-1)) = 2^256 - 1
```

**Protection:**
```solidity
if (int256(totalValueWithoutQuarantine) + 
    currentInOutDelta - 
    inOutDeltaOnRefSlot < 0) {
    revert UnderflowInTotalValueCalculation();
}
```

#### Cumulative Fee Validation

**Lower Bound (Monotonicity):**
```solidity
uint256 previousCumulativeLidoFees = 
    obligations.settledLidoFees + obligations.unsettledLidoFees;
    
if (previousCumulativeLidoFees > _cumulativeLidoFees) {
    revert CumulativeLidoFeesTooLow(
        _cumulativeLidoFees, 
        previousCumulativeLidoFees
    );
}
```

**Upper Bound (Rate Limiting):**
```solidity
uint256 maxLidoFees = 
    (vaultsDataTimestamp - record.report.timestamp) * 
    maxLidoFeeRatePerSecond;
    
if (_cumulativeLidoFees - previousCumulativeLidoFees > maxLidoFees) {
    revert CumulativeLidoFeesTooLarge(
        _cumulativeLidoFees - previousCumulativeLidoFees, 
        maxLidoFees
    );
}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

#### Liability Shares Validation

**Upper Bound:**

```solidity
if (_maxLiabilityShares < _liabilityShares || _maxLiabilityShares < record.maxLiabilityShares) {
    revert InvalidMaxLiabilityShares();
}

```
```

- Direct funds are fully verifiable without oracle input
- Indirect funds face time delays, limiting attack profitability
- Multiple oracle reports are required for large-scale attacks, increasing detection probability

## Rationale

### Design Decisions

**1. Quarantine Period vs. Daily Limits**

Daily limits were rejected because they can be circumvented through sybil attacks. The quarantine mechanism provides stronger protection while maintaining usability for legitimate users.

**2. 3.5% Threshold Selection**

This threshold balances security with user experience:
- High enough to cover normal staking rewards without delays
- Low enough to limit attack profitability
- Based on empirical data from Ethereum staking yields

**3. No Upper Bound for liabilityShares**

While overstated liabilityShares can freeze funds, this is self-correcting and doesn't create systemic risk, making additional checks unnecessary overhead.

**4. Direct Fund Verification**

Leveraging on-chain `inOutDelta` tracking eliminates oracle trust requirements for direct deposits, significantly reducing attack surface.

### Alternative Approaches Considered

> 1. **Full on-chain verification**: Requires EIP-4788 implementation, not currently available

Reviewer: wdym by "not currently available"?

When: Oracle reports corresponding totalValue increase
Then: Full amount immediately available (no quarantine due to on-chain verification)
```

### Scenario 4: Fee Validation
```
Given: Previous cumulativeLidoFees = 100 ETH, 1 day elapsed
When: Oracle reports cumulativeLidoFees = 116 ETH
Then: Report accepted (increase < 0.18 ETH/second * 86400 seconds)
```

### Scenario 5: Underflow Prevention
```
Given: Report with totalValue that would cause negative intermediate value
When: Contract calculates dynamic totalValue
Then: Transaction reverts with UnderflowInTotalValueCalculation error
```

## Security Considerations

### Known Risks

1. **Oracle Corruption Detection Dependency**: The solution's effectiveness relies on detecting oracle compromise. Without detection, the quarantine mechanism cannot prevent attacks.

2. **3-Day Attack Window**: Even with quarantine, a sophisticated attacker with patient capital could extract 3.5% per report cycle.

3. **Implementation Complexity**: The dual funding mechanism adds complexity that must be carefully managed in user interfaces.

### Mitigations

- Continuous accounting oracle monitoring and anomaly detection

> - GateSeal mechanism for the prompt emergency mode response

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [GateSeal](https://docs.lido.fi/contracts/gate-seal) mechanism for the prompt emergency mode response
```

- Clear user communication about quarantine periods
- Multiple rigorous security audits of implementation

## Conclusion

This proposal establishes a comprehensive framework for validating stVault oracle reports through:

1. **Differentiated funding flows**: Direct (verifiable) vs. indirect (quarantined)

> 2. **Parameter-specific validations**: Tailored checks for each vault parameter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Parameter-specific validations**: Tailored checks for each reported vault parameter
```

```solidity
uint256(int256(-1)) = 2^256 - 1
```

**Protection:**
```solidity
if (int256(totalValueWithoutQuarantine) + 
    currentInOutDelta - 
    inOutDeltaOnRefSlot < 0) {
    revert UnderflowInTotalValueCalculation();
}
```

#### Cumulative Fee Validation

**Lower Bound (Monotonicity):**
```solidity
uint256 previousCumulativeLidoFees = 
    obligations.settledLidoFees + obligations.unsettledLidoFees;
    
if (previousCumulativeLidoFees > _cumulativeLidoFees) {
    revert CumulativeLidoFeesTooLow(
        _cumulativeLidoFees, 
        previousCumulativeLidoFees
    );
}
```

**Upper Bound (Rate Limiting):**
```solidity
uint256 maxLidoFees = 
    (vaultsDataTimestamp - record.report.timestamp) * 
    maxLidoFeeRatePerSecond;
    
if (_cumulativeLidoFees - previousCumulativeLidoFees > maxLidoFees) {
    revert CumulativeLidoFeesTooLarge(
        _cumulativeLidoFees - previousCumulativeLidoFees, 
        maxLidoFees
    );
}
```

#### Max Liability Shares Validation

**Upper Bound:**
```solidity
if (_maxLiabilityShares < _liabilityShares || _maxLiabilityShares < record.maxLiabilityShares) {
    revert InvalidMaxLiabilityShares();
}

> 

Reviewer: The code block is not closed

**Definition:** External shares minted against the staking vault position, representing the vault's stETH liability that rebases with the token.

**Attack vectors:**
- **Overstatement:** 
    - Freezes excess funds by inflating the vault's recorded liability
    - Blocks legit disconnect from the VaultHub and Lido protocol (i.e., can block an exit escape hatch for vaults)
- **Understatement:** 
    - Enables premature collateral withdrawal, potentially violating the reserve ratio (RR) requirements
    - Allows premature disconnect from the VaultHub and Lido protocol

> #### 3. maxLiabilityShares

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 4. maxLiabilityShares
```
